Gavin's SOP updates (#38)
emlab-ucsb/SOP: 06-code-documentation.qmd

# Code Documentation

## Philosophy: Documentation as a Research Asset
At emLab, we view code documentation not as an afterthought, but as a core component of our research's reproducibility and longevity. High-quality documentation ensures that our "future selves" and external collaborators can understand the *intent* behind the analysis, not just the mechanics of the code.

*Core Principles:*

* **Code is for humans:** Write code that is easy for a human to read, using documentation to bridge the gap between "what" the code does and "why" it does it.
* **Self-documenting code first:** Strive for expressive variable and function names (e.g., `calculate_fishing_mortality()` rather than `f_mort_calc()`). Documentation should supplement, not fix, obscure code.

> * **Documentation is near the code:** Keep documentation in the source files (via Roxygen2 or comments) to ensure it stays updated as the code changes.

Reviewer: A few small edits to make this sound less LLM-y:
```suggestion
At emLab, we view code documentation as a core component of our research's reproducibility and longevity. High-quality documentation ensures that our future selves and external collaborators can understand the *intent* behind the analysis, not just the mechanics of the code.

*Core Principles:*

* **Use comments to explain intent.** Comments are most useful when they explain why something is being done, document assumptions, or clarify non-obvious decisions, not when they restate what the code does.
* **Prioritize readability:** Write code with the expectation that someone else will need to read and modify it, using documentation to bridge the gap between "what" the code does and "why" it does it. Use clear, descriptive function names (e.g., `calculate_fishing_mortality()` rather than `f_mort_calc()`). Documentation should supplement, not fix, obscure code.
* **Keep documentation close to the code:** Function documentation, comments, and examples should live alongside the source code (via Roxygen2 or comments) whenever possible so they are easier to maintain as the code evolves.
```

## Specific Practices & Tools

> ## Roxygen2 for Function Documentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Roxygen2 for Function Documentation
```

Sub-heading, right?

For all custom functions in R, endeavor to use the `roxygen2` framework. This is the gold standard used by the tidyverse team. It allows us to generate formal documentation while keeping the descriptions immediately above the function definition.

**Key tags to use:**
* `@title`: A brief, one-line summary.
* `@description`: A more detailed explanation of what the function does.
* `@param`: Define each input argument (type, default value, and purpose).
* `@return`: Describe the output object.
* `@example`: Provide a minimal working example of the function in use.

```r
#' Calculate Shannon Diversity Index
#'
#' @description This function computes the Shannon-Wiener diversity index 
#' for a given vector of species counts.
#'
#' @param counts A numeric vector of species abundances.
#' @return A single numeric value representing the diversity index.
#' @export
#'
#' @examples
#' calc_shannon(c(10, 20, 5, 2))
calc_shannon <- function(counts) {
  p <- counts / sum(counts)
  return(-sum(p * log(p), na.rm = TRUE))
}
```

> ## In-line Comments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### In-line Comments
```

In-line comments should be used strategically to explain the logic that isn't immediately obvious from the code itself. We follow the [Tidyverse Style Guide](https://style.tidyverse.org/documentation.html) to keep our scripts clean and professional.

* **Focus on "Why," not "What":** Avoid redundant comments that simply restate the code (e.g., avoid `# filter for year 2020` followed by `filter(year == 2020)`). Instead, explain the reasoning: `# Excluding 2020 due to incomplete survey coverage in the Indo-Pacific`.
* **Formatting:** Always start a comment with `#` followed by a single space.
* **Section Breaks:** For long scripts, use four dashes after a comment to create foldable sections in RStudio and Positron to improve navigability: `# Data Cleaning ----`.
* **Pipe Documentation:** When using long `magrittr` or base R pipes (`%>%` or `|>`), place comments above the specific line of the pipe that performs a complex or non-intuitive transformation.
* **Todo Tags:** Use `# TODO:` to flag unfinished tasks or areas that require further optimization. This makes it easy for collaborators to search the codebase for pending items.

> ## AI-Assisted Documentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### AI-Assisted Documentation
```

We encourage the use of AI tools to accelerate the documentation process and improve the clarity of our codebase. However, AI is a co-pilot, not an autopilot; the researcher is ultimately responsible for the accuracy and technical integrity of all documentation.

> ### GitHub Copilot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### GitHub Copilot
```

GitHub Copilot is integrated into our IDEs (RStudio, Positron, and VS Code) to provide real-time suggestions.

* **Auto-completion:** As you begin writing a Roxygen2 block (`#' `), Copilot will often suggest `@param` descriptions and `@return` types based on the logic within the function body.
* **Inline Chat:** Use the shortcut `Cmd + I` (macOS) or `Ctrl + I` (Windows) to open the Copilot chat directly above a code block. You can use the `/doc` command to have Copilot generate a comprehensive documentation header for the highlighted code.
* **Unit Tests:** Use Copilot to generate the `@examples` section of your Roxygen2 headers, ensuring that the function's usage is well-documented and tested.

> ### Claude Code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Claude Code
```

Claude Code is our preferred tool for high-level project documentation, architectural overviews, and refactoring legacy scripts.

> * **Project Summarization:** Claude is exceptionally skilled at reading entire directories. Use it to generate a comprehensive `README.md` for a new repository or to summarize the workflow of a complex analysis for a Quarto report.

Reviewer: Lol!
```suggestion
* **Project Summarization:** Claude can quickly read entire project directories. Use it to generate a comprehensive `README.md` for a new repository or to summarize the workflow of a complex analysis for a Quarto report.
```
